---
title: 'Introduction to Operating System Development'
pubDate: 2024-12-12
description: 'The start of my exploration of OS development'
author: 'Will Walsh'
tags: ["programming", "bare bones", "c", "assembly", "operating systems"]
---

## What is an Operating System?

- a software controlling the operation of a computer system and its resources, which among other things, must be capable of loading and executing user programs providing standardized (hardware-independent) input/output interface for them.
- major functions may include :-
  - managing memory and other system resources
  - imposing security and access policies
  - scheduling and multiplexing processes and threads
  - launching and closing user programs dynamically
  - providing a basic user interface and application programming interface
- An operating system is **NOT**:
  - the computer hardware
  - a specific application such as a word processor or browser
  - a suite of utilities (like the GNU tools, which are used in many Unix-derived systems)
  - a development environment (though some OSes, such as UCSD Pascal or Smalltalk-80, incorporate an interpreter and IDE)
  - a graphical user interface (though many modern operating systems incorporate a GUI as part of the OS)

## What is a Kernel?

- The kernel of an OS is something you will never see. It enables any other programs to execute, handles events generated by hardware (called *interrupts*) and software (called *system calls*), and manages access to resources.
- *Interrupt handlers* will for instance get the number of the key you just pressed, and convert it to the corresponding character stored in a buffer, so another program can use it.
- *System calls* are initiated by user-level programs, for opening files, starting other programs, etc.
- Most user programs do not directly issue the system calls (except for asm programs, for instance), but instead use a *standard library* which does the ugly job of formatting arguments and generating the system call.
- The kernel usually defines a few *abstractions* like files, processes, sockets, directories, etc, which correspond to an internal state.

## What is a Shell?

- A shell is a special program that is usually integrated into an OS which offers humans an interface with the computer, and allows :-
  - the user to select a program to be started, and optionally give it arguments
  - trivial operation on the local storage, like listing directories' contents, and moving and copying files across the system.
- Modern shells can also have various extra features, such as :-
  - Auto/Tab completion - by pressing Tab (or any preferred key), the shell will try to autocomplete it.
  - Character insertion - the user can move around their input using arrow keys and characters will be inserted/overwritten (insert key)
  - Shell history - by pressing up or down, the user can scroll through previous input
  - Scrolling - when there are more lines than the console can display, save the output in a buffer and allow the user to scroll
  - Scripting - many shells have custom scripting languages, such as Bash or DOS batch

## What is a GUI about?

- The GUI is the most visible part of any OS, and must be able to :-
  - catch user input events and dispatch them to the proper object
  - update the internal information of what is displayed and determine which parts need to be redrawn
  - update the *visible* screen contents, redrawing the required parts
  - feel natural, intuitive and responsive to the user

### Desktop Environment, Window Manager, Widget Library

- When launching into KDE or Windows, that is a *desktop environment*
- The part of the system responsible for organizing the windows, resizing, etc, is the *window manager*
- The subsystem that does the drawing of control elements and rendering documents to the screen is called the *widget library*

## Why develop an OS?

My reason behind why I want to develop an Operating System is because it's fun. I want to know how everything works, how it all fits...

